README.md, before:

# Causal Uplift & Policy Optimization Engine

A production-grade Causal Inference system designed to optimize marketing ROI by identifying **who to target** (Persuadables) and **who to avoid** (Sleeping Dogs).

![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.10+-blue.svg)
![Docker](https://img.shields.io/badge/Docker-Enabled-2496ED.svg)
![FastAPI](https://img.shields.io/badge/FastAPI-0.95+-009688.svg)
![Streamlit](https://img.shields.io/badge/Streamlit-1.22+-FF4B4B.svg)

---

## 🚀 The Business Problem
Traditional Churn/Propensity models answer: *"Who is likely to buy?"*  
**Causal Uplift Logic** answers: *"Who will buy **only if** we intervene?"*

By targeting customers based on **propensity**, companies waste millions on:
1.  **Sure Things:** Loyal customers who would have bought anyway (Subsidy Cost).
2.  **Sleeping Dogs:** Customers who react *negatively* to marketing (Churn Cost).
3.  **Lost Causes:** Customers who will never buy (Efficiency Cost).

### The Solution: "The Hard Market"
This engine simulates a realistic, difficult market environment where **75% of customers are 'Neutral'** (ignore ads). A traditional model fails here. Our T-Learner identifies the **14.4% Persuadable Segment** (the "Needle in the Haystack"), delivering massive efficiency gains.

---

## 📊 Key Results
Based on a 1,000,000-user validation set:

| Metric | Result | Context |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Global Lift** | **3.2x** | Improvement over random targeting. |
| **Cost Savings** | **~86%** | Savings by ignoring "Neutrals" & "Sleeping Dogs". |
| **Persuadable Segment** | **14.4%** | The actual targetable audience (Pre-filtered). |
| **Strategy** | **Avoid Negative Lift** | Explicitly excludes the 10% "Sleeping Dog" segment. |

> *"Targeting everyone costs $10M. Targeting only Persuadables costs $1.4M for similar returns."*

---

## 🏗️ Architecture

The system assumes a modern microservices architecture, running entirely in Docker.

```mermaid
graph LR
    A["Data Pipeline (Generator)"] -->|Parquet| B("T-Learner Training")
    B -->|Pickle/Parquet| C{"Inference API"}
    C -->|REST| D["Streamlit Dashboard"]
    B -->|Artifacts| D
```

### Tech Stack
*   **Model**: T-Learner (Meta-Learner) using `XGBoost` base learners.
*   **API**: `FastAPI` for real-time CATE (Conditional Average Treatment Effect) inference.
*   **Dashboard**: `Streamlit` for policy simulation and interactive ROI analysis.
*   **Environment**: `uv` for dependency management, `Docker Compose` for orchestration.

---

## 🛠️ Quick Start

**Prerequisites:** Docker & Docker Compose.

### 1. Launch the Stack
The system comes pre-trained with the "Hard Market" model artifacts.
```bash
docker-compose up --build
```

### 2. Access Interfaces
*   **Dashboard:** [http://localhost:8501](http://localhost:8501)  
    *Explore the Qini Curve, ROI Analysis, and Optimal Budget Allocation.*
*   **API Docs:** [http://localhost:8000/docs](http://localhost:8000/docs)  
    *Test the `/predict` and `/optimize` endpoints instantly.*

---

## 📂 Project Structure

```text
src/
├── api/                 # FastAPI Service
│   ├── main.py          # Endpoints (Predict, Optimize)
│   └── schemas.py       # Pydantic Models
├── dashboard/           # Streamlit App
│   └── app.py           # Interactive UI & Plotly Viz
├── data/                # Data Pipeline
│   └── generator.py     # Quantile-Based Synthetic Generator
├── models/              # Causal Models
│   └── t_learner.py     # T-Learner Class & Training Script
└── visualization/       # Shared Plotting Utils
```

---

## 🔬 Methodology: T-Learner
We use a **Two-Model (T-Learner)** approach to estimate CATE:
1.  **$\mu_1(x)$**: Estimates probability of conversion *with* treatment.
2.  **$\mu_0(x)$**: Estimates probability of conversion *without* treatment.
3.  **CATE**: $\tau(x) = \mu_1(x) - \mu_0(x)$

### Behavior-Based Segmentation
Instead of arbitrary deciles, we segment users based on strict lift thresholds:
*   🟢 **Persuadable** ($\tau > 0.05$): Strong positive reaction. **Target.**
*   🔴 **Sleeping Dog** ($\tau < -0.05$): Strong negative reaction. **Avoid.**
*   ⚪ **Neutral** ($-0.05 \le \tau \le 0.05$): No significant reaction. **Ignore.**

---

## 📚 References & Inspiration

This project implements modern Uplift Modeling techniques inspired by the following open-source research and implementations:

* **Criteo Uplift Modelling** (Hugh Huyton): Inspiration for the "Treatment vs. Control" visual analysis techniques.
    * [Link to Kaggle Notebook](https://www.kaggle.com/code/hughhuyton/criteo-uplift-modelling)
* **Qini Curve Implementation** (Davin Wijaya): Reference for the manual calculation of Area Under Qini Curve (AUQC).
    * [Link to Kaggle Notebook](https://www.kaggle.com/code/davinwijaya/uplift-modeling-qini-curve-with-python)
* **RetailHero Uplift** (Maksim Shevchenko): Guided the logic for multi-class segmentation (Persuadables vs. Sleeping Dogs).
    * [Link to GitHub](https://github.com/maks-sh/scikit-uplift/blob/master/notebooks/RetailHero_EN.ipynb)
* **Marketing Uplift Demo** (Mai Anh Dang): Provided context for "ROI-based" optimization strategies in retail.
    * [Link to Kaggle Notebook](https://www.kaggle.com/code/maianhdang/demo-uplift-modeling-in-marketing)

---

## 🛡️ License
MIT License. Free for educational and portfolio use.

Commit message:

fix(ops): Update README app_port to 7860 to match Docker config

README.md, after:

---
title: Causal Uplift Engine
emoji: 🎯
colorFrom: green
colorTo: blue
sdk: docker
app_port: 7860
pinned: false
license: mit
short_description: Shift focus from "who will churn" to "who can be saved."
---

# Causal Uplift & Policy Optimization Engine

A production-grade Causal Inference system designed to optimize marketing ROI by identifying **who to target** (Persuadables) and **who to avoid** (Sleeping Dogs).

![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.10+-blue.svg)
![Docker](https://img.shields.io/badge/Docker-Enabled-2496ED.svg)
![FastAPI](https://img.shields.io/badge/FastAPI-0.95+-009688.svg)
![Streamlit](https://img.shields.io/badge/Streamlit-1.22+-FF4B4B.svg)

---

## 🚀 The Business Problem
Traditional Churn/Propensity models answer: *"Who is likely to buy?"*  
**Causal Uplift Logic** answers: *"Who will buy **only if** we intervene?"*

By targeting customers based on **propensity**, companies waste millions on:
1.  **Sure Things:** Loyal customers who would have bought anyway (Subsidy Cost).
2.  **Sleeping Dogs:** Customers who react *negatively* to marketing (Churn Cost).
3.  **Lost Causes:** Customers who will never buy (Efficiency Cost).

### The Solution: "The Hard Market"
This engine simulates a realistic, difficult market environment where **75% of customers are 'Neutral'** (ignore ads). A traditional model fails here. Our T-Learner identifies the **14.4% Persuadable Segment** (the "Needle in the Haystack"), delivering massive efficiency gains.

---

## 📊 Key Results
Based on a 1,000,000-user validation set:

| Metric | Result | Context |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Global Lift** | **3.2x** | Improvement over random targeting. |
| **Cost Savings** | **~86%** | Savings by ignoring "Neutrals" & "Sleeping Dogs". |
| **Persuadable Segment** | **14.4%** | The actual targetable audience (Pre-filtered). |
| **Strategy** | **Avoid Negative Lift** | Explicitly excludes the 10% "Sleeping Dog" segment. |

> *"Targeting everyone costs $10M. Targeting only Persuadables costs $1.4M for similar returns."*

---

## 🏗️ Architecture

The system assumes a modern microservices architecture, running entirely in Docker.

```mermaid
graph LR
    A["Data Pipeline (Generator)"] -->|Parquet| B("T-Learner Training")
    B -->|Pickle/Parquet| C{"Inference API"}
    C -->|REST| D["Streamlit Dashboard"]
    B -->|Artifacts| D
```

### Tech Stack
*   **Model**: T-Learner (Meta-Learner) using `XGBoost` base learners.
*   **API**: `FastAPI` for real-time CATE (Conditional Average Treatment Effect) inference.
*   **Dashboard**: `Streamlit` for policy simulation and interactive ROI analysis.
*   **Environment**: `uv` for dependency management, `Docker Compose` for orchestration.

---

## 🛠️ Quick Start

**Prerequisites:** Docker & Docker Compose.

### 1. Launch the Stack
The system comes pre-trained with the "Hard Market" model artifacts.
```bash
docker-compose up --build
```

### 2. Access Interfaces
*   **Dashboard:** [http://localhost:8501](http://localhost:8501)  
    *Explore the Qini Curve, ROI Analysis, and Optimal Budget Allocation.*
*   **API Docs:** [http://localhost:8000/docs](http://localhost:8000/docs)  
    *Test the `/predict` and `/optimize` endpoints instantly.*

---

## 📂 Project Structure

```text
src/
├── api/                 # FastAPI Service
│   ├── main.py          # Endpoints (Predict, Optimize)
│   └── schemas.py       # Pydantic Models
├── dashboard/           # Streamlit App
│   └── app.py           # Interactive UI & Plotly Viz
├── data/                # Data Pipeline
│   └── generator.py     # Quantile-Based Synthetic Generator
├── models/              # Causal Models
│   └── t_learner.py     # T-Learner Class & Training Script
└── visualization/       # Shared Plotting Utils
```

---

## 🔬 Methodology: T-Learner
We use a **Two-Model (T-Learner)** approach to estimate CATE:
1.  **$\mu_1(x)$**: Estimates probability of conversion *with* treatment.
2.  **$\mu_0(x)$**: Estimates probability of conversion *without* treatment.
3.  **CATE**: $\tau(x) = \mu_1(x) - \mu_0(x)$

### Behavior-Based Segmentation
Instead of arbitrary deciles, we segment users based on strict lift thresholds:
*   🟢 **Persuadable** ($\tau > 0.05$): Strong positive reaction. **Target.**
*   🔴 **Sleeping Dog** ($\tau < -0.05$): Strong negative reaction. **Avoid.**
*   ⚪ **Neutral** ($-0.05 \le \tau \le 0.05$): No significant reaction. **Ignore.**

---

## 📚 References & Inspiration

This project implements modern Uplift Modeling techniques inspired by the following open-source research and implementations:

* **Criteo Uplift Modelling** (Hugh Huyton): Inspiration for the "Treatment vs. Control" visual analysis techniques.
    * [Link to Kaggle Notebook](https://www.kaggle.com/code/hughhuyton/criteo-uplift-modelling)
* **Qini Curve Implementation** (Davin Wijaya): Reference for the manual calculation of Area Under Qini Curve (AUQC).
    * [Link to Kaggle Notebook](https://www.kaggle.com/code/davinwijaya/uplift-modeling-qini-curve-with-python)
* **RetailHero Uplift** (Maksim Shevchenko): Guided the logic for multi-class segmentation (Persuadables vs. Sleeping Dogs).
    * [Link to GitHub](https://github.com/maks-sh/scikit-uplift/blob/master/notebooks/RetailHero_EN.ipynb)
* **Marketing Uplift Demo** (Mai Anh Dang): Provided context for "ROI-based" optimization strategies in retail.
    * [Link to Kaggle Notebook](https://www.kaggle.com/code/maianhdang/demo-uplift-modeling-in-marketing)

---

## 🛡️ License
MIT License. Free for educational and portfolio use.
